[Blog] Validations in Ember using yup (#1630)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: _posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps.md

---
title: 'Data validation in Ember with Yup'
author: 'Bartlomiej Dudzik'
github: BobrImperator
twitter: BobrImperator
topic: ember
bio: 'Software Developer'
description:
  'Bartlomiej Dudzik shows how you can easily create validations wrapper based
  on a library of your liking.'
---

Since Ember's Octane edition it's much easier to integrate with third-party
libraries. Because of that I've been searching for alternatives to
`ember-changeset` and `ember-cp-validations`. I will show you how to create your
own validations around the Yup validations library.

<!--break-->

### Quick look at Yup

Yup provides factory methods for different data types that you can use to
construct schemas and their constraints for your data. The following code

> imports the `string` schema, and calls `required` and `email` methods to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
imports the `string` schema, and calls the `required` and `email` methods to
```

describe what type of data is allowed. The returned schema `emailRequired`

> validates values to be "a valid non-empty string that matches email pattern".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validates values to be "a valid non-empty string that matches an email pattern".
```

        acc[key].push(validationError);
      }

      return acc;
    }, {});
  }

  async validate() {
    try {
      await this.schema.validate(this.#validationProperties(), {
        abortEarly: false,
      });

      this.error = null;
      return true;
    } catch (error) {
      this.error = error;

      return false;
    }
  }

  #validationProperties() {
    return getProperties(this.context, ...Object.keys(this.shape));
  }
}
```

That's it :) Let's go through it real quick.

There are 4 properties defined `context`, `schema`, `shape` and `error` which is
`@tracked`.

- `context` is either the data or the whole instance of the object we're
  validating.
- `shape` the expected shape of the data; this is used to create `schema`
- `schema` is a Yup schema created from `shape`
- `error` is a `ValidationError` thrown by `schema.validate()` when the data
  doesn't match the `schema`.

The constructor takes 2 arguments `context` and `shape`, we set those on the
instance as well as create `schema` off of `shape`.

- `fieldErrors` is a computed property that returns an object which keys are
  paths to the schemas that failed validations. The object is created by

>   reducing a list of errors returned from `ValidationError` when the data is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  reducing a list of errors read from `ValidationError` when the data is
```

_"returned from"_ sounds like `ValidationError` was a function?

>   validated against the schema is validated.

Reviewer: I find this last sentence a bit confusing. All this error handling happens **after** the data has been validated. I think what you're trying to say is that the `error` property (which is of type `ValidationError`) is only set if the data is invalid?

I think you can just skip this sentence altogether as it's clear that the error is only set if the data is invalid anyway?

- `validate` is an asynchronous method that calls `validate` on our `schema`,
  awaits the result, resets errors if validations pass, otherwise catches an
  error and sets it on the class instance. It's important that

>   `abortEarly: false` option is passed to `schema.validate()` as otherwise if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the `abortEarly: false` option is passed to `schema.validate()` as otherwise if
```

>   `abortEarly: false` option is passed to `schema.validate()` as otherwise if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `abortEarly: false` option is passed to `schema.validate()` as otherwise, if
```

  any field would throw an error, it would stop validating the rest of the data,
  which is not desired. Furthermore `validate` receives data returned from
  `#validationProperties`, the reason for that being Ember Proxies. In order to

>   correctly support proxies e.g Ember-Data models, we need to grab data from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  correctly support proxies, e.g Ember-Data models, we need to grab data from
```

const locale =
  (key, localeValues = []) =>
  (validationParams) => ({
    key,
    path: validationParams.path,
    values: getProperties(validationParams, ...localeValues),
  });

setLocale({
  mixed: {
    default: locale('field.invalid'),
    required: locale('field.required'),
    oneOf: locale('field.oneOf', ['values']),
    notOneOf: locale('field.notOneOf', ['values']),
    defined: locale('field.defined'),
  },
  string: {
    min: locale('string.min', ['min'])
  },
})
```

`locale` is a higher order function that returns a function that is later used
by Yup to produce our messages. The first argument it takes is a translation key
of our liking that would then be consumed by `ember-intl` e.g `field.invalid`.
The second argument is a list of fields it should get from `validationParams`
that we receive from Yup, the parameters could have values like `min` and `max`
that would be passed to `ember-intl` `t` helper.

At the end of the day the produced messages will look like this:

```javascript
{
  key: "string.min",
  path: "name",
  values: { min: 8 }
}
```

```javascript
{
  key: "field.required",
  path: "age",
  values: {}
}
```

> Let's see what messages are returned after `User` model is validated when the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see what messages are returned after the `User` model is validated when the
```

form is submitted:

![Internationalized user fields demo](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-1.gif)

### Validating related schemas

As you could see before, pets aren't being validated yet. There are 2 things
that need to be done first:

- Create validations for the `Pet` model.

> - Validate pets when User is validated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Validate pets when the user is validated.
```

Reviewer: or

```suggestion
- Validate pets when `User`s are validated.
```

Reviewer: or

```suggestion
- Validate pets when a `User` is validated.
```

Here's the `Pet` model with validations.

```javascript
import Model, { attr, belongsTo } from '@ember-data/model';
import { string } from 'yup';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';

export default class PetModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;

  @belongsTo('user') owner;
}
```

Now let's take a look at the code for connecting the validations for `User` and

> `Pet`. This will validate pets when a User is validated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Pet`. This will validate pets when a `User` is validated.
```

  return this.test(function (value) {
    return value.validations.validate();
  });
});
```

This bit is fairly straightforward, we add a `relationship` method to the
`object` schema. When `relationship` is called, it adds a custom test that
receives `value` which is an instance of a model. After that it's just a matter
of accessing the validaitons wrapper and running it's `validate` method.

#### hasMany

```javascript
import { addMethod, array } from 'yup';

addMethod(array, 'relationship', function () {
  return this.transform(
    (_value, originalValue) => originalValue?.toArray() || [],
  ).test(async function (value) {
    const validations = await Promise.allSettled(
      value.map(({ validations }) => {
        return validations.validate();
      }),
    );

    return validations.every((validation) => validation);
  });
});
```

`hasMany` relationships are pretty much the same as `belongsTo`. The only
difference is that the `hasMany` promise-proxy needs to be transformed into an
array that Yup will be able to handle which is done by calling `toArray`. Then
the test validates all object in the array and check whether all validations
return `true`.

> That's it now we need to modify the `User` model by adding `pets` to its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it – now we need to modify the `User` model by adding `pets` to its
```

or some other way of separating the _"That't it"_ from the next sentencen

validations.

```javascript
import Model, { attr, hasMany } from '@ember-data/model';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';
import { number, array, string } from 'yup';

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
    pets: array().relationship(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;

  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

![Internationalized user and pet fields demo](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-with-pets-2.gif)

### Conditional validations

There are times when you need to do some conditional validations based on some
different state. Here we'll have a really weird requirement where `pet.name` is

> only required when user is not allergic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only required when the user is not allergic.
```

  awaits the result, resets errors if validations pass, otherwise catches an
  error and sets it on the class instance. It's important that
  `abortEarly: false` option is passed to `schema.validate()` as otherwise if
  any field would throw an error, it would stop validating the rest of the data,
  which is not desired. Furthermore `validate` receives data returned from
  `#validationProperties`, the reason for that being Ember Proxies. In order to
  correctly support proxies e.g Ember-Data models, we need to grab data from
  `context` with the help of `getProperties`.

#### Usage

```javascript
import Model, { attr, hasMany } from '@ember-data/model';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';
import { number, string } from 'yup';

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;
  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

We instantiate YupValidations and pass it some arguments, a User model instance,
and Yup **shape**.

Later, inside a form component I'd like to be able to just call

> `YupValidations#validate` method which returns a Promise with Boolean as a
> result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`YupValidations#validate` method which returns a Promise that resolves to a Boolean.
```

Author: Thanks!

```javascript
import Component from '@glimmer/component';
import { action } from '@ember/object';
import { inject as service } from '@ember/service';

export default class UserFormComponent extends Component {
  @service store;

  user = this.store.createRecord('user');

  @action
  async onSubmit(event) {
    event.preventDefault();

    if (await this.user.validations.validate()) {
      this.user.save();
    }
  }
}
```

> Further on, there's `ErrorMessage` component that receives a **list** of error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further on, there's an `ErrorMessage` component that receives a **list** of error
```

messages and handles them in some way. Normally we'd show internationalized
messages with the help of `ember-intl`, but in our case we'll just show their
keys directly like so:

```hbs
{{! error-message.hbs }}

{{#each @messages as |message|}}
  <div>
    {{message.key}}
  </div>
{{/each}}
```

Finally the component invocation:

```hbs
<ErrorMessage @messages={{this.user.validations.fieldErrors.age}} />
```

#### Internationalization

Yup by default returns messages in plain text based on some built-in templates

> and some way of concatenation, it's not interesting for us because in Ember apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and some way of concatenation. That's not an option for us though because in Ember apps
```

we normally use `ember-intl` for translating text. Luckily Yup allows to use
functions that will produce messages.

The full list of messages can be found in
[Yup's source code](https://github.com/jquense/yup/blob/master/src/locale.ts)

```javascript
import { setLocale } from ‘yup’;
import { getProperties } from ‘@ember/object’;

const locale =
  (key, localeValues = []) =>
  (validationParams) => ({
    key,
    path: validationParams.path,
    values: getProperties(validationParams, ...localeValues),
  });

setLocale({
  mixed: {
    default: locale('field.invalid'),
    required: locale('field.required'),
    oneOf: locale('field.oneOf', ['values']),
    notOneOf: locale('field.notOneOf', ['values']),
    defined: locale('field.defined'),
  },
  string: {
    min: locale('string.min', ['min'])
  },
})
```

> - `locale` is a higher order function that returns a function that is later used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`locale` is a higher order function that returns a function that is later used
```

This doesn't actually seem to be a list?

  by Yup to produce our messages. The first argument it takes is a translation
  key of our liking that would then be consumed by `ember-intl` e.g
  `field.invalid`. The second argument is a list of fields it should get from
  `validationParams` that we receive from Yup, the parameters could have values
  like `min` and `max` that would be passed to `ember-intl` `t` helper.

At the end of the day the produced messages will look like this:

```javascript
{
  key: "string.min",
  path: "name",
  values: { min: 8 }
}
```

```javascript
{
  key: "field.required",
  path: "age",
  values: {}
}
```

> ![Internationalized user fields demo](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-1.gif)

Reviewer: I'd add a quick explanation before this that summarizes what model you're validating in the screen recording – it's not necessarily entirely clear I think.

### Validating related schemas

As you could see before, pets aren't being validated yet. There are 2 things
that need to be done first:

> - Create validations for Pet model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create validations for the `Pet` model
```

> - Validate Pets when User is validated similarly to how ember-model-validator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Validate pets when the user is validated similarly to how ember-model-validator
```

> - Validate Pets when User is validated similarly to how ember-model-validator
>   behaves

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Validate Pets when User is validated
```

I'm not sure anyone know how ember-model-validator behaves? I personally don't know anything about that addon…

Author: I thought it'd be nice to include in case someone familiar with it reads the post. So it's like "Hey! This could be an alternative to the ember-model-validator".

But I don't feel strongly about it so I'll remove it.

> Here's the Pet model implementation which includes the validations wrapper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's the `Pet` model implementation which includes the validations wrapper.
```

> Here's the Pet model implementation which includes the validations wrapper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's the Pet model implementation with validations.
```

not sure what _"validations wrapper"_ refers to?

```javascript
import Model, { attr, belongsTo } from '@ember-data/model';
import { string } from 'yup';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';

export default class PetModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;

  @belongsTo('user') owner;
}
```

> Now let's take a look at the code for connecting User and Pet. This will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's take a look at the code for connecting the validations for `User` and `Pet`. This will
```

> validate pets when a User is validated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validate a user's pets when the user itself is validated.
```

Yup has a public API for extending schemas as well as creating custom tests,
both can be used to create the connection we want.

- `addMethod` accepts a schema, a name of a method that is to be added on the
  target schema, as well as a function.
- `mixed#test` is a method that exists on all schemas, it can be used in
  multiple ways, but in this case the only thing we need to know is that it's a
  method that receives a function as an argument, and the function it receives

>   has to return a promise that returns true or false.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  has to return a promise that returns `true` or `false`.
```

#### belongsTo

```javascript
import { addMethod, object } from 'yup';

addMethod(object, 'relationship', function () {
  return this.test(function (value) {
    return value.validations.validate();
  });
});
```

This bit is fairly straightforward, we add a `relationship` method to the
`object` schema. When `relationship` is called, it adds a custom test that
receives `value` which is an instance of a model. After that it's just a matter
of accessing the validaitons wrapper and running it's `validate` method.

#### hasMany

```javascript
import { addMethod, array } from 'yup';

addMethod(array, 'relationship', function () {
  return this.transform(
    (_value, originalValue) => originalValue?.toArray() || [],
  ).test(async function (value) {

>     const validations = await Promise.all(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    const validations = await Promise.allSettled(
```

With `Promise.all` wouldn't this throw as soon as one of the validations fail?

      value.map(({ validations }) => {
        return validations.validate();
      }),
    );

>     return validations.every((validation) => validation === true);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    return validations.every((validation) => validation);
```

don't think we actually need `===`?

Author: True, the validate methods returns only booleans

  });
});
```

> Collection of relationships is pretty much the same as `belongsTo`. The only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`hasMany` relationships are pretty much the same as `belongsTo`. The only
```

difference is that the `hasMany` promise-proxy needs to be transformed into an

> array that Yup will be able to handle it's done by calling `toArray`. Then the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
array that Yup will be able to handle which is done by calling `toArray`. Then the
```

> array that Yup will be able to handle it's done by calling `toArray`. Then the
> test needs to handle a list of models by iterating over them with `#map` and
> awaiting them. Lastly we can check if every validation was `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
array that Yup will be able to handle it's done by calling `toArray`. Then the
test validates all objects in the array and checks whether all validations return `true`.
```

seems to be a bit too much detail otherwise?

> That's it now we need to modify the User model by adding `pets` to its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it now we need to modify the `User` model by adding `pets` to its
```

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
    pets: array().relationship(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;

  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

![Internationalized user and pet fields demo](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-with-pets-2.gif)

### Conditional validations

There are times when you need to do some conditional validations based on some
different state. Here we'll have a really weird requirement where `pet.name` is
only required when user is not allergic.

```javascript
import Model, { attr, hasMany } from '@ember-data/model';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';
import { number, array, string } from 'yup';

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
    pets: array().relationship(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;
  @attr('boolean') isAllergic;

  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

The only thing added here is a new `isAllergic` attribute.

> Here's the modified Pet model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's the modified `Pet` model:
```

```javascript
import Model, { attr, belongsTo } from '@ember-data/model';
import { boolean, string } from 'yup';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';

export default class PetModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().when(['isAllergic'], {
      is: true,
      then: string().notRequired(),
      otherwise: string().required(),
    }),
    isAllergic: boolean(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;

>   @belongsTo('user') owner;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  @belongsTo('user') user;
```

I think `owner` can be confusing since that's also the container in Ember?

Author: The container can't be accessed like that any longer I don't think.
I think you're going a bit deep here :D

I've changed it anyways since user might be a better name here.

>   get isAllergic() {

Reviewer: I'd consider renaming this to `isUserAllergic` or so to make clear this comes from the `User` model?

    return this.owner.get('isAllergic');
  }
}
```

> Pet now implements the conditional `name` validation by calling `when` method of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Pet` now implements the conditional `name` validation by calling the `when` method of
```

> a `string` schema. The `when` method accepts a list of names of dependent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `string` schema. The `when` method accepts a list of names of dependent
```

> properties, then it accepts an object which specifies that "when is true then
> string is not required", "otherwise string is required".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
properties, then we pass an object which specifies that the `name` attribute is not required when `isAllergic` is `true` but only otherwise.
```

imports `string` schema, and calls `required` and `email` methods to describe
what type of data is allowed. Here we can read that `emailRequired` has to be "a
valid non-empty string that matches email pattern".

```javascript
import { string } from 'yup';

const emailRequired = string().required().email();
```

#### Marking data as **required**

It's really important to understand `required()` correctly when working with
Yup, this is why I say "a **valid** non-empty string".

Here's a direct quote from
[Yup's readme](https://github.com/jquense/yup#mixedrequiredmessage-string--function-schema):

> Mark the schema as required, which will not allow undefined or null as a
> value. Note that unless a schema is marked as nullable() a null value is
> treated as a type error, not a missing value. Mark a schema as
> mixed().nullable().required() treat null as missing.

> Watch out! string().required) works a little different and additionally
> prevents empty string values ('') when required.

I think that's a really good default and Yup itself also excels as a casting
library, making it a great tool for data parsing, and is recursive meaning it

> can handle trees quite well.

Author: Was thinking about removing this section and it looks like we both agree on that.

#### Describing objects with Yup

Let's see how we can create a schema that describes some complex data. Here's
some example found in Yup docs:

```javascript
import { object, string, number, date } from 'yup';

const schema = object().shape({
  name: string().required(),
  age: number().required().positive().integer(),
  email: string().email(),
  website: string().url(),
  createdOn: date().default(function () {
    return new Date();
  }),
});
```

`object().shape()` takes an object as an argument whose key values are other Yup
schemas, then it returns a schema that we can cast or validate against i.e

```javascript
schema
  .isValid({
    name: 'jimmy',
    age: 24,
  })
  .then(function (valid) {
    valid; // => true
  });

> ```

Author: I think Promise chain is ok here, makes more sense to me when used outside a function.

### Putting it together

We can start implementing the Yup validations wrapper, we can take a look at how

> I'd imagine it to be used at high level.

Author: I've this bit above the usage.

#### Usage

```javascript
import Model, { attr, hasMany } from '@ember-data/model';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';
import { number, string } from 'yup';

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;
  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

> We instantiate YupValidations and pass it some arguments, a User model instance,

Reviewer: I feel `YupValidations` comes a bit out of the blue? I'm not sure what it is? Would it be possible to introduce it earlier (I assume it's essentially what the previous blocks contain anyway)?

---
title: 'Data validation in Ember with Yup'
author: 'Bartlomiej Dudzik'
github: BobrImperator
twitter: BobrImperator
topic: ember
bio: 'Software Developer'
description:
  'Bartlomiej Dudzik shows how you can easily create validations wrapper based
  on a library of your liking.'
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2021-11-09-automating-ember-learning-releases-with-rust/og-image.png
---

Because of what Octane did it might feel like ember-changeset is outdated while
currently ember-cp-validations doesn't work with Glimmer components. I'm not
saying that we should move away from those or that they won't be modernized
given some time, but at the same time I've been looking for alternatives. I'd
like to show you how to integrate a 3rd party validation library in an Ember
project.

> 

Author: Changed.

<!--break-->

![Effective infrastructure for efficient development workflows illustration](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-09-automating-ember-learning-releases-with-rust/illustration.svg#full)

### Quick look at yup

Yup is based on schemas, there's a schema for all javascript data types i.e
`string`, `number`, `array`, `object` and so on. It's relying on builder pattern
to define schema constraints e.g the following code import `string` schema, and
calls `required` and `email` methods to describe what type of data is allowed.
Here we can read that `emailRequired` has to be "a valid non-empty string that
matches email pattern".

> 

Author: Changed.

Question regarding the proposed text. "Yup is based on a variety of schemas for all JavaScript data types" sounds like Yup has multiple schemas for a single data type, or am I understanding it wrong?

> 

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is still relevant?

To me it means that Yup has many schemas for many different data types :)

> 

Reviewer: I think Yup provides factory methods for different data types that you use to construct your particular schema for your particular data on the fly.

> 

Author: I've changed it to what Emma proposed, I dunno what I was smoking at the time of reading her suggestion, it makes total sense to me right now :D.

> 

Reviewer: I don't think it's correct like this. Yup doesn't provide schemas or is based on schemas but it is a schema builder that provides functions to build your own schema that you can then use to validate data against. Check their website for more: https://github.com/jquense/yup#yup

> 

Author: What you're saying is true as well, but I don't see how what we're saying in the blog post isn't correct either.
I don't feel the need to explain what is Yup and how it works exactly, it doesn't matter.

What matters is how I use it and what can I do with it.

> 

Reviewer: > Yup is based on a variety of schemas…

and 

> …imports the `string` schema…

are simply not correct :) Yup is not based on schemas but helps you define schemas and `string` isn't a schema but a module that provides builder functions to create schemas with strings.

Both things are not huge deals, just not actually correct.

> 

Author: changed

> prevents empty string values ('') when required.

I think that's a really good default and yup itself also excels as a casting
library, not just validations, so it can be a great tool for data parsing, it's
also recursive, so it should handle trees well.

#### Describing objects with yup

Let's see how we can create a schema that describes some complex data. Here's
some example found in yup docs:

```javascript
import { object, string, number, date } from 'yup';

const schema = object().shape({
  name: string().required(),
  age: number().required().positive().integer(),
  email: string().email(),
  website: string().url(),
  createdOn: date().default(function () {
    return new Date();
  }),
});
```

`object().shape()` takes an object as an argument whose key values are other yup
schemas, then it returns a schema that we can cast or validate against i.e

```javascript
schema
  .isValid({
    name: 'jimmy',
    age: 24,
  })
  .then(function (valid) {
    valid; // => true
  });
```

### Putting it together

We can start implementing the yup validations wrapper, but we can take a look at
how I'd imagine it to be used at high level.

> 

Reviewer 2: Why did you use "but" here? :)

#### Usage

```javascript
import Model, { attr, hasMany } from '@ember-data/model';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';
import { number, string } from 'yup';

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;
  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

We instantiate YupValidations and pass it some arguments, a model instance and
yup **shape**.

> 

Reviewer 2: * a model instance, and yup

Later, inside a component I'd like to be able to just call a `validate` method
on a `validations` instance, I expect the `validate` method to be **async**
which returns a boolean whether validations passed or not.

> 

Reviewer 2: Unclear 😶‍🌫️

    }, {});
  }

  async validate() {
    try {
      await this.schema.validate(this.#validationProperties(), {
        abortEarly: false,
      });

      this.error = null;
      return true;
    } catch (error) {
      this.error = error;

      return false;
    }
  }

  #validationProperties() {
    return getProperties(this.context, ...Object.keys(this.shape));
  }
}
```

That's it :) Let's go through it real quick.

There are 4 class fields defined `context`, `schema`, `shape` and `error` which
is `@tracked`.

- `context` is either data or the whole instance of a model or component that
  we'll fetch data from.
- `shape` the data shape which is later used to create `schema`
- `schema` is a yup schema created from `shape`
- `error` is a `ValidationError` thrown by `schema.validate()` when it fails.

The class constructor takes 2 arguments `context` and `shape`, we set those on
the instance as well as create `schema` off of `shape`.

- `fieldErrors` is a computed property that returns an object which keys are
  paths to the schemas that failed validations. The object is created by
  reducing a list of errors returned from `ValidationError` when `schema` is
  validated.

> - `validate` is an asynchronous method that in turn calls `validate` on our

Reviewer 2: in turn?

Author: Yes, I mean to say here that `validate` method calls `validate` method of another validations schema.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove "in turn" then, it makes the sentence a bit unclear

Author: Done.

  `schema`, awaits the result, resets errors if validations pass, otherwise
  catches an error and sets it on the class instance. It's important that
  `abortEarly: false` option is passed to `schema.validate()` as otherwise if
  any field would throw an error, it would stop validating the rest of the data,

>   which is not desired. Another important thing here is that `validate` receives

Reviewer 2: "Furthermore/moreover/in addition to that, "validate"..."

and some way of concatenation, it's not interesting for us because in Ember apps
we're used to using `ember-intl` for translating text. Luckily yup allows to use
functions that will produce messages.

The full list of messages can be found in
[yup's source code](https://github.com/jquense/yup/blob/master/src/locale.ts)

```javascript
import { setLocale } from ‘yup’;
import { getProperties } from ‘@ember/object’;

const locale =
  (key, localeValues = []) =>
  (validationParams) => ({
    key,
    path: validationParams.path,
    values: getProperties(validationParams, ...localeValues),
  });

setLocale({
  mixed: {
    default: locale('field.invalid'),
    required: locale('field.required'),
    oneOf: locale('field.oneOf', ['values']),
    notOneOf: locale('field.notOneOf', ['values']),
    defined: locale('field.defined'),
  },
  string: {
    min: locale('string.min', ['min'])
  },
})
```

- `locale` is a higher order function that returns a function that then is used
  by yup to produce our messages. The first argument it takes is a translation
  key of our liking that would then be consumed by `ember-intl` e.g

>   `field.invalid`. The second argument is a list of fields it should get from

Author: Do you mean to move `e.g` to the beginning of the line?
If so, the markdown formatter does automatically puts `e.g` in the line above.

>   `field.invalid`. The second argument is a list of fields it should get from

Reviewer 2: No, I meant that e.g. is written with a point after each letter :D

>   `field.invalid`. The second argument is a list of fields it should get from

Author: Apparently I'm blind, didn't notice the dot 🙈

  `validationParams` that we receive from yup, the params could have values like
  `min` and `max` that would be passed to `ember-intl` `t` helper.

At the end of the day the produced messages would look like this:

```javascript
{
  key: "string.min",
  path: "name",
  values: { min: 8 }
}
```

```javascript
{
  key: "field.required",
  path: "age",
  values: {}
}
```

> ![Internationalized user fields demo](/assets/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-1.gif)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Internationalized user fields demo](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-1.gif)
```

  method that receives a function as an argument, and the function it receives
  has to return a promise that returns with true or false.

#### belongsTo

```javascript
import { addMethod, object } from 'yup';

addMethod(object, 'relationship', function () {
  return this.test(function (value) {
    return value.validations.validate();
  });
});
```

This bit is failry straightforward, we add a `relationship` method to `object`
schema. When `relationship` is called, it adds a custom test that receives
`value` which would be an instance of a model, then it's just a matter of
accessing the validaitons wrapper and running it's `validate` method.

#### hasMany

```javascript
import { addMethod, array } from 'yup';

addMethod(array, 'relationship', function () {
  return this.transform(
    (_value, originalValue) => originalValue?.toArray() || [],
  ).test(async function (value) {
    const validations = await Promise.all(
      value.map(({ validations }) => {
        return validations.validate();
      }),
    );

    return validations.every((validation) => validation === true);
  });
});
```

Collection of relationships is pretty much the same as `belongsTo`, the only

> difference is that first the hasMany promise-proxy needs to be transformed into

Reviewer 2: "'belongsTo'. The only difference is that the HasMany promise-proxy needs to be transformed into an array by calling "toArray" before Yup is able to handle it."

an array that yup will be able to handle it's done by calling `toArray`. Then
the test needs to handle a list of models by iterating over them with `#map` and
awaiting them, then we check if every validation was `true`.

> 

Reviewer 2: "them. Lastly, we can check if every validation was "true"."

That's it now we need to modify the User model by adding `pets` to it's
validations.

> 

Reviewer 2: *its validations

```javascript
import Model, { attr, hasMany } from '@ember-data/model';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';
import { number, array, string } from 'yup';

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
    pets: array().relationship(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;

  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

> ![Internationalized user and pet fields demo](/assets/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-with-pets-2.gif)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Internationalized user and pet fields demo](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/form-user-with-pets-2.gif)
```

### Conditional validations

There are times when you need to do some conditional validation based on some

> different state. Here we'll have a really weird requirement where `pet.name` is

Reviewer 2: *some conditional validations

only required when user is not allergic.

```javascript
import Model, { attr, hasMany } from '@ember-data/model';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';
import { number, array, string } from 'yup';

export default class UserModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().required(),
    age: number().required(),
    pets: array().relationship(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @attr('number') age;
  @attr('boolean') isAllergic;

  @hasMany('pet') pets;
}
```

The only thing added here is a new `isAllergic` attribute.

Here's modified Pet model:

> 

Reviewer 2: *the modified

```javascript
import Model, { attr, belongsTo } from '@ember-data/model';
import { boolean, string } from 'yup';
import YupValidations from 'emberfest-validations/validations/yup';

export default class PetModel extends Model {
  validations = new YupValidations(this, {
    name: string().when(['isAllergic'], {
      is: true,
      then: string().notRequired(),
      otherwise: string().required(),
    }),
    isAllergic: boolean(),
  });

  @attr('string') name;
  @belongsTo('user') owner;

  get isAllergic() {
    return this.owner.get('isAllergic');
  }
}
```

> Pet now implements conditional `name` validation by calling `when` method of a

Reviewer 2: *the conditional

> `string` schema, yup's branching is a really cool thing, the `when` method

Reviewer 2: "schema. The 'when' method accepts..."

accepts a list of names of dependent properties, then it accepts an object which

> specifies that "when is true then string is not required", "otherwise string is

Reviewer 2: *and an object

required".

> ![Internationalized user and pet fields demo](/assets/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/conditional-form-user-3.gif)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Internationalized user and pet fields demo](/assets/images/posts/2021-11-23-validations-in-ember-apps/conditional-form-user-3.gif)
```

### Summary

We've taken a look at an alternative approach to validating data in our apps,

> now it's easier than ever to integrate with 3rd party libraries with mostly just

Reviewer 2: *apps. Now...

ember proxies standing on our way. I also find it beneficial to be able to use

> something like yup for teams that work in many environments, yup might as well

Reviewer 2: *environments. (remove the last bit)
